# Introduction

## Functions

- In Haskell, a function is a mapping that takes one or more arguments and produces a single result
- Function is defined using an equation that gives a name for the
function, a name for each of its arguments, and a body that specifies how the result can be calculated in terms of the arguments.

```haskell
double x = x + x
```

- When a function is applied to actual arguments, the result is obtained by **substituting these arguments into the body of the function in place of the argument names.**
- This process may immediately produce a result that cannot be further simplified, such as a number.
- More commonly, however, the result will be an expression containing other function applications, which must then be processed in the same way to produce the final result.

```txt
    double 3
= {applying double with arg 3} 3 + 3
= {applying +} 6
```

- Similarly, the result of the nested application `double (double 2)` is like:

```txt
    double (double 2)
= {applying inner double with arg 2} double(2 + 2)
= {applying +} double(4)
= {applying outer double with arg 4} 4 + 4
= {applying +} 8
```

- In general, the order in which functions are applied in a calculation does not affect the value of the final result, but it may affect the number of steps required.
- For example, above could have done with outer double first, which takes more steps.

```txt
    double (double 2)
= {applying outer double with arg 2} (double 2) + (double 2)
= {applying first double 2} (2 + 2) + (double 2)
= {applying first +} 4 + (double 2)
= {applying double} 4 + (2 + 2)
= {applying second +} 4 + 4
= {applying +} 8
```

## Functional Programming

- Functional programming can be viewed as a style of programming in which the basic method of computation is **the application of functions to arguments.**

- Comparison: sum of the integers

  - Imperative programming: the basic method of computation is changing stored values, in the sense that executing the program results in a sequence of assignments.
  - Imperative instructions that specify precisely how the computation should proceed.

```cpp
int total = 0;
for (int count = 1; count <= n; ++count) {
    total = total + count;
}

/*
total = 0;
count = 1;
total = 1;
count = 2;
....
*/
```

v.s.

```haskell
sum [1..5]
= { applying [..] } sum [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
= { applying sum } 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
= { applying + } 15
```

## Features of Haskell

- **:boom: Powerful type system**: Haskell has a type system that usually requires little type information from the programmer, but allows a large class of incompatibility errors in programs to be automatically detected prior to their execution, using a sophisticated process called type inference.
- **:boom: List comprehensions**: powerful comprehension notation that constructs new lists by selecting and filtering elements from one or more existing lists.
- **:boom: Recursive functions**: In Haskell, the basic mechanism by which looping is achieved is through recursive functions.
- **:boom: Higher-order functions**: functions can freely take functions as arguments and produce functions as results.
- **:boom: Effectful functions**: Functions in Haskell are pure functions that take all their inputs as arguments and produce all their outputs as results. However, many programs require some form of side effect that would appear to be at odds with purity, such as reading input from the keyboard, or writing output to the screen, while the program is running. Haskell provides a uniform framework for programming with effects, without compromising the purity of functions, based upon the use of monads and applicatives.
- **:boom: Generic functions**: Haskell type system also supports functions that are generic over much richer kinds of structures. For example, the language provides a range of library functions that can be used with any type that is functorial, applicative, monadic, foldable, or traversable, and moreover, allows new structures and generic functions over them to be defined.
- **:boom: Lazy evaluation**: based upon the idea that no computation should be performed until its result is actually required. As well as avoiding unnecessary computation, lazy evaluation ensures that programs terminate whenever possible, encourages programming in a modular style using intermediate data structures, and even allows programming with infinite structures.
- **:boom: Equational reasoning**: Because programs in Haskell are pure functions, simple equational reasoning techniques can be used to **execute programs, to transform programs, to prove properties of programs, and even to calculate programs directly from specifications of their intended behaviour**. Equational reasoning is particularly powerful when combined with the use of **induction** to reason about functions that are defined using recursion


## How do `sum` actually look like?

```haskell
sum [] = 0
sum (n:ns) = n + sum ns
```

- In Haskell, every function has a type that specifies the nature of its arguments and results, which is automatically inferred from the definition of the function.
- For example, the function `sum` defined above has the following type: "For any type `a` of numbers, `sum` is a function that maps a
list of such numbers to a single such number."

```haskell
Num a => [a] -> a
```

- Use of types allows many errors in programs to be automatically detected prior to executing the programs themselves.

## Another example: qsort in Haskell

```haskell
qsort [] = []
qsort (x:xs) = qsort smaller ++ [x] ++ qsort larger
               where
                smaller = [a | a <- xs, a <= x]
                larger  = [b | b <- xs, b  > x]
```

- `++` is an operator that appends two lists together
-`where` is a keyword that introduces local definitions
- The function qsort is also more general than might be expected, being applicable not just with numbers, but with any type of ordered values:


```haskell
qsort :: Ord a => [a] -> [a]
```

- Haskell supports many different types of ordered values, including numbers, single characters such as ’ a ’, and strings of characters
such as "abcde".

## The level of precision and generality that can be achieved

```haskell
seqn [] = return []
seqn (act:acts) =  do x <- act
                      xs <- seq acts
                      return (x:xs)
```

- The interesting aspect of the function `seqn` is its type. One possible type that can inferred from the above definition is the following:

```haskell
seqn :: [IO a] -> IO [a]
```

- a list of IO (input/output) actions that produce results of some type a to a single IO action that produces a list of such results.
- the type makes explicit that the function `seqn` involves the side effect of performing input/output actions.
- Using types in this manner to keep a clear distinction between functions that are pure and those that involve side effects is a central aspect of Haskell, and brings important benefits in terms of both programming and reasoning.
- In fact, the function `seqn` is more general than it may initially appear. In particular, the manner in which the function is defined is not specific to the case of input/output actions, but is equally valid for other forms of effects too. For example, it can also be used to sequence actions that may change stored values, fail to succeed, write to a log file, and so on.
- This flexibility is captured in Haskell by means of the following more general type:

```haskell
seqn :: Monad m => [m a] -> m [a]
```

- or any monadic type `m`, of which `IO` is just one example, `seqn` maps a list of actions of type `m` a into a single action that returns a list of values of type `a`.
- Being able to define generic functions such as `seqn` that can be used with different kinds of effects is a key feature of Haskell.