# Defining functions

## New from old

- Perhaps the most straightforward way to define new functions is simply by combining one or more existing functions.

```haskell
splitAt :: Int -> [a] -> ([a], [a])
splitAt n xs = (take n xs, drop n xs)

recip :: Fractional a => a -> a
recip n = 1/n
```

## Conditional expressions

- Note that Unlike in some programming languages, conditional expressions in
Haskell must always have an `else` branch

```haskell
abs n = if n >= 0 then n else -n

-- or can do it with nested like:

signum :: Int -> Int
signum n = if n < 0 then -1 else
                if n == 0 then 0 else 1
```

## Guarded equations

- As an alternative to using conditional expressions, functions can also be defined using **guarded equations**
  - in which a **sequence of logical expressions** called **guards** is used to choose between a sequence of **results of the same type**.
- The symbol `|` is read as *such that*, and the guard `otherwise` is defined in the standard prelude simply by `otherwise = True`
- Ending a sequence of guards with `otherwise` is not necessary, but provides a convenient way of handling all other cases, as well as avoiding the possibility that none of the guards in the sequence is `True`, which would otherwise result in an error.
- The main benefit of guarded equations over conditional expressions is that definitions with multiple guards are easier to read.

```haskell
abs n | n >= 0 = n
      | otherwise = -n

signum n | n < 0 = -1
         | n == 0 = 0
         | otherwise = 1
```

## Pattern matching

- Many functions have a simple and intuitive definition using pattern matching, in which **a sequence of syntactic expressions** called **patterns** is used to choose between **a sequence of results of the same type**.

```haskell
not :: Bool -> Bool
not False = True
not True = False
```

- Functions with more than one argument can also be defined using pattern matching, in which case the patterns for each argument are matched in order within each equation.

```haskell
(&&) :: Bool -> Bool -> Bool

True && True = True
True && False = False
False && True = False
False && False = False
```

- This definition can be simplified by combining the last three equations into a single equation, using the wildcard pattern `_` that matches any value:

```haskell
(&&) :: Bool -> Bool -> Bool

True && True = True
_ && _ = False
```

- This version also has the benefit that, under lazy evaluation as discussed in chapter 15, if the first argument is `False`, then the result `False` is returned without the need to evaluate the second argument.
- In practice, the prelude defines `&&` as:
  - e.g. make the choice about which equation applies using the value of the first argument only:

```haskell
True && b = b
False && _ = False
```

- Note that Haskell does not permit the same name to be used for more than one argument in a single equation.

```haskell
b && b = b            -- error, can't use same name of arguments
False && _ = False
```

- If you want ot check whether 2 arguments are equal, you could use guard like:

```haskell
b && c | b == c    = b
       | otherwise = False
```

In the remainder of this section we introduce two useful ways to build larger patterns by combining smaller patterns.

### Tuple patterns

- A tuple of patterns is itself a pattern, which matches any tuple of the same arity whose components all match the corresponding patterns in order.

```haskell
-- fst select the first components of a pair
fst :: (a, b) -> a
fst (x,_) = x

-- snd select the second components of a pair
snd :: (a, b) -> b
snd (_,y) = y
```

### List patterns

- A list of patterns is itself a pattern, which matches any list of the same length whose elements all match the corresponding patterns in order.

```haskell
-- decides if a list contains precisely three characters beginning with 'a'
test :: [Char] -> Bool
test ['a', _, _] = True
test _         = False
```

The `:` "cons" operator

- Note: `[1, 2, 3]` e constructed one element at a time starting from the empty list `[]` using an operator `:` called "cons"
- Specifically: `[1, 2, 3] = 1 : (2 : (3: []))` or say `[1, 2, 3] = 1:2:3:[]` (the cons operator is assumed to associate to the right)
- The cons operator can also be used to construct patterns, which match any non-empty list whose first and remaining elements match the corresponding patterns in order.

```haskell
-- decides if a list contains any number of characters begins with 'a'
test :: [Char] -> Bool
test ('a':_) = True
test _       = False
```

- Similarly, the library functions `head` and `tail` that respectively select and remove the first element of a non-empty list are defined as follows:

```haskell
head :: [a] -> a
head (x:_) = x

tail ::[a] -> [a]
tail (_:xs) = xs
```

- Note that cons patterns must be parenthesized, because **function application has higher priority than all other operators in the language**.
  - For example, the definition `head x:_ = x` without parentheses means `(head x):_ = x`, which is both the incorrect meaning and an invalid definition.


## Lambda expressions

- As an alternative to defining functions using equations, functions can also be constructed using lambda expressions, which comprise
  - a pattern for each of the arguments,
  - a body that specifies how the result can be calculated in terms of the arguments,
  - but do not give a name for the function itself.
- In other words, lambda expressions are nameless functions
- Despite the fact that they have no names, functions constructed using lambda expressions can be used in the same way as any other functions.

```haskell
> (\x -> x + x) 2
4
```

- The symbol `\` represents the Greek letter lambda, written as `λ`.

Lambda expressions have a number of practical applications.

- First of all, they can be used to formalize the meaning of curried function definitions.

```haskell
add :: Int -> Int -> Int
add x y = x + y
```

- can be understood as:

```haskell
add :: Int -> (Int -> Int)
add = \x -> (\y = x + y)
```

- Secondly, lambda expressions are also useful when defining functions that return functions as results by their very nature, rather than as a consequence of currying.

```haskell
-- the library function const that returns a constant function that always produces a given value
const :: a -> b -> a
const x _ = x
```

- can be defined as:

```haskell
-- makes explicit that it returns a function as its result
const :: a -> (b -> a)
const x = \_ -> x
```

- Finally, lambda expressions can be used to avoid having to name a function that is only referenced once in a program

```haskell
odds :: Int -> [Int]
odds n = map f [0..n-1]
         where f x = x * 2 + 1
```

- Here, `f` is only referenced once, so we can simplified by:

```haskell
odds :: Int -> [Int]
odds n = map (\x = x * 2 + 1) [0..n-1]
```

## Operator sections

- Functions such as `+` that are written between their two arguments are called operators.
- Any function with two arguments can be converted into an operator by enclosing the name of the function in single back
quotes, as in 7 \`div\` 2
- Any operator can be converted into a curried function that is written before its arguments by enclosing the name of the operator in parentheses, as in `(+) 1 2`
- Moreover, this convention also allows one of the arguments to be included in the parentheses if desired, as in `(1+) 2` and `(+ 2) 1`
- In general, if `#` is an operator, then expressions of the form `(#)`, `(x #)`, and `(# y)` for arguments `x` and `y` are called **sections**, whose meaning as functions can be formalized using lambda expressions as follows:

```haskell
(#) = \x -> (\y -> x # y)
(x #) = \y -> x # y
(# y) = \x -> x # y
```

Sections have three primary applications.

- First of all, they can be used to construct a number of simple but useful functions in a particularly compact way

```haskell
-- the addition function
(+) = \x -> (\y -> x + y)
-- the successor function
(1+) = \y -> 1 + y
-- the reciprocation function
(1/) = \y -> 1 / y
-- the doubling function
(*2) = \x -> x * 2
-- the halving function
(/2) = \x -> x / 2
```

- Secondly, sections are necessary when **stating the type of operators,** because **an operator itself is not a valid expression** in Haskell.

```haskell
(+) :: Int -> Int -> Int
```

- Finally, sections are also necessary when **using operators as arguments to other functions**. 

```haskell
-- calculates the sum of a list of integers can be defined by using the
-- operator + as an argument to function `foldl`
sum :: [Int] -> Int
sum = foldl (+) 0
```